Self-control is a function of self-control, fatigue.  Fatigue is a function of sleep, intellectual fatigue (which depends on intellectual endurance), social fatigue (which is a function of social endurance and intro/extroversion (yes I know that's not real)
There are trivia, which may be learned from others, theorized based on related information, or deduced based on events that are seen.  Trivia may be known fully or vaguely, and sureness can be great or small, but generally >68.27% sureness and >50% knowledge is necessary to act on it (higher sureness can compensate for lower knowledge, and vice versa, but relationship is worse than linear).  They are situationally communicable—if you are on a boat and you see your friend start to drink sea water, you then explicitly tell him as an *information transfer game*, _not_ a /social/ game.  (When someone else tells you a trivia in an information transfer game, you remember it better and are more sure of it, unless you distruct them in which case you explicitly think it untrue.)

Trivialities:
* Drinking salty or sugary water makes you thirsty - easy to pick up, especially if you are close to the shore.  For those who live *very* far from the shore, you have to be in a very urban or intellectual place, or generally know a lot of trivia, to know this

Tentative list of motivations:
Hunger.  Food, sleep, drugs; drugs less effect but more possibility if addicted.  Sleep and drugs both become asymptotically less effective at reducing percieved hunger as actual hunger increases
Thirst.  Water, other liquid.  Salty/sugary liquids temporarily decrease percieved thirst, but increase actual thirst, and become less effective past a certain point.  Individuals with good judgement will likely drink soda when that's the only thing available and they know actual water will be available.  If they have good judgement or know a lot of trivia, they will not drink sugar/salty water when they are actually in danger of dying from thirst, until they are about to die at which point they may drink it if their self-control is low.
Sleep.  Sleeping at home (if applicable) in a bed (if applicable), at a friend's house, in a car, in a hotel, on the side of the road (or somewhere else sensible if there's no road).  Reasonable stipulations
